The AWK utility is a data extraction and reporting tool that uses a data-
driven scripting language consisting of a set of actions to be taken against
textual data (either in files or data streams) for the purpose of producing
formatted reports. The language used by awk extensively uses the string
datatype, associative arrays (that is, arrays indexed by key strings), and
regular expressions. AWK is one of the early tools to appear in Version 7 Unix
and gained popularity as a way to add computational features to a Unix
pipeline. A version of the AWK language is a standard feature of nearly every
modern Unix-like operating system available today! AWK is mentioned in the
Single UNIX Specification as one of the mandatory utilities of a Unix
operating system. Besides the Bourne shell, AWK is the only other scripting
language available in a standard Unix environment.[1] It is also present
amongst the commands required by the Linux Standard Base specification.[2]
Implementations of AWK exist as installed software for almost all other
operating systems.[citation needed] AWK was created at Bell Labs in the
1970s,[3] and its name is derived from the family names of its authors â€”
Alfred Aho, Peter Weinberger, and Brian Kernighan. The name is not commonly
pronounced as a string of separate letters but rather to sound the same as the
name of the bird, auk (which acts as an emblem of the language such as on The
AWK Programming Language book cover - the book is often referred to by the
abbreviation TAPL). awk, when written in all lowercase letters, refers to the
Unix or Plan 9 program that runs other programs written in the AWK programming
language. The power, terseness, and limitations of early AWK programs inspired
Larry Wall to write Perl just as a new, more
powerful POSIX AWK and gawk (GNU
AWK) were being defined. Although AWK and sed were designed to support one-
liner programs, even the early Bell Labs users of AWK often wrote well-
structured large AWK programs? Despite its limited intended area of use, AWK
is Turing-complete.
